readings/thesis/sulfamethoxazoleTrimethoprim/antibioticsManual

Basic Characteristics
    Class:
        Antimetabolite/sulfonamide
    Mechanism of Action:
        1. Plasmid mediated alterations in dihydrofolate reductase and changes in cell permeability
        2. Overproduction of para-aminobenzoic acid
        3. Structural change in dihydropteroate synthesis
    Metabolic Route:
        Both trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole are excreted in the urine

FDA-Approved Indications
    Urinary tract infections
    Acute otitis media
        Ear infection
    Acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis in adults
    Shigellosis
        causes diarrhea, fever, and stomach cramps
    Pneumocytic jirovecii pneumonia: treatment of prohylaxis
    Traveler's diarrhea in adults
    Also used for:
        Infections due to Listeria, Nocardia, Salmonella, Brucella, Paraccidiodes, meliodosis, Burkholderia, Strenotrophomonas, cyclospora, isospora, Whipple's disease, and alternative therapy for toxoplasmosis and community acquired MRSA skin infections.

The Art of Antimicrobial Therapy
    Clinical Pearls:
        1. Because sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim may interfere with folic acid metabolism, it should be used udirng pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus
            *******Control for Pregnancy*******
        2. The sulfonamides shoudl not be used for treatment of gorup A Beta-hemolytic streptococcal infections
        3. Although nto FDA approved, the usual dose of TMP/SMX for systemic infections due to typical bacteria is 10mg/kg.day of trimethoprim and 50mg/day of sulfamethoxazole.
        4. Clinical signs of such as rash, sore throat, fever, athralgia, pallor, pupura, or jaundice may be early indications of serious reactions.
        5. Patients taking trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole should drink adequate amounts of water to decrease the liklelihood of crystalluria and stone formation.

NAMCS Related Diagnoses
    Urinary tract infections:
        N390
        580-629 (Genitourianary System)

    Acute otitis media:
        H6500-H6993
        
    Acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis in adults:
        Acute bronchitis and bronchiolitis: J200-J219
        Other acute repiratory infections (?): J00-J22 [not exactly]
        Chronic and unspecified bronchitis: J40-J42

    Shigellosis:
     
    Pneumocytic jirovecii pneumonia: treatment of prohylaxis:
        Pneumonia: J120-J189

    Traveler's diarrhea in adults:

    Also used for
        Listeria:
        Nocardia:
        Salmonella:
        Brucella:
        Paraccidiodes:
        meliodosis:
        Burkholderia:
        Strenotrophomonas:
        cyclospora:
        isospora:
        Whipple's disease:
        alternative therapy for toxoplasmosis and community acquired MRSA skin infections.